=== 04-11 (1454 characters) ===
5. Where there is a real hatred, we not only oppose sin in ourselves but in others too. The church at Ephesus could not bear with those who were evil (Revelation, chapter 2, verse 2). Paul sharply censured Peter for his dissimulation although he was an apostle. Christ in a holy displeasure whipped the money-changers out of the temple (John, chapter 2, verse 15). He would not suffer the temple to be made an exchange. Nehemiah rebuked the nobles for their usury (Nehemiah, chapter 3, verse 7) and their Sabbath profanation (Nehemiah, chapter 13, verse 17). A sin-hater will not endure wickedness in his family: ‘He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house’ (Psalm 101, verse 7). What a shame it is when magistrates can show height of spirit in their passions but no heroic spirit in suppressing vice. Those who have no antipathy against sin are strangers to repentance. Sin is in them as poison in a serpent, which, being natural to it, affords delight. How far are they from repentance who, instead of hating sin, love sin! To the godly sin is as a thorn in the eye; to the wicked it is as a crown on the head: ‘When thou doest evil, then thou rejoicest’ (Jeremiah, chapter 11, verse 13). Loving of sin is worse than committing it. A good man may run into a sinful action unawares, but to love sin is desperate. What is it that makes a swine but loving to tumble in the mire? What is it that makes a devil but loving that which opposes God?

=== 04-12 (1484 characters) ===
To love sin shows that the will is in sin, and the more of the will there is in a sin, the greater the sin. Wilfulness makes it a sin not to be purged by sacrifice (Hebrews, chapter 10, verse 26). O how many there are that love the forbidden fruit! They love their oaths and adulteries; they love the sin and hate the reproof. Solomon speaks of a generation of men: ‘madness is in their heart while they live’ (Ecclesiastes, chapter 9, verse 3). So for men to love sin, to hug that which will be their death, to sport with damnation, ‘madness is in their heart.’ It persuades us to show our repentance by a bitter hatred of sin. There is a deadly antipathy between the scorpion and the crocodile; such should there be between the heart and sin. Question. What is there in sin that may make a penitent hate it? Answer. Sin is the cursed thing, the most misshapen monster. The apostle Paul uses a very emphatic word to express it: ‘that sin might become exceeding sinful’ (Romans, chapter 7, verse 13), or as it is in the Greek, ‘hyperbolically sinful.’ That sin is a hyperbolical mischief and deserves hatred will appear if we look upon sin as a fourfold conceit: (1) Look upon the origin of sin, from whence it comes. It fetches its pedigree from hell: ‘He that committeth sin is of the devil, for the devil sinneth from the beginning’ (First John, chapter 3, verse 8). Sin is the devil’s proper work. God has a hand in ordering sin, it is true, but Satan has a hand in acting it out.

=== 04-13 (1447 characters) ===
How hateful is it to be doing that which is the peculiar work of the devil, indeed, that which makes men devils? (2) Look upon sin in its nature, and it will appear very hateful. See how scripture has pencilled it out: it is a dishonouring of God (Romans, chapter 2, verse 23); a despising of God (First Samuel, chapter 2, verse 30); a fretting of God (Ezekiel, chapter 16, verse 43); a wearying of God (Isaiah, chapter 7, verse 13); a breaking the heart of God, as a loving husband is with the unchaste conduct of his wife: ‘I am broken with their whorish heart’ (Ezekiel, chapter 6, verse 9). Sin, when acted to the height, is a crucifying Christ afresh and putting him to open shame (Hebrews, chapter 6, verse 6), that is, impudent sinners pierce Christ in his saints, and were he now upon earth they would crucify him again in his person. Behold the odious nature of sin. (3) Look upon sin in its comparison, and it appears ghastly. Compare sin with affliction and hell, and it is worse than both. It is worse than affliction: sickness, poverty, death. There is more malignity in a drop of sin than in a sea of affliction, for sin is the cause of affliction, and the cause is more than the effect. The sword of God’s justice lies quiet in the scabbard till sin draws it out. Affliction is good for us: ‘It is good for me that I have been afflicted’ (Psalm 119, verse 71). Affliction causes repentance (Second Chronicles, chapter 33, verse 12).

=== 04-14 (1311 characters) ===
The viper, being stricken, casts up its poison; so, God’s rod striking us, we spit away the poison of sin. Affliction betters our grace. Gold is purest, and juniper sweetest, in the fire. Affliction prevents damnation (First Corinthians, chapter 11, verse 32). Therefore, Maurice the emperor prayed to God to punish him in this life that he might not be punished hereafter. Thus, affliction is in many ways for our good, but there is no good in sin. Manasseh’s affliction brought him to humiliation, but Judas’ sin brought him to desperation. Affliction only reaches the body, but sin goes further: it poisons the fancy, disorders the affections. Affliction is but corrective; sin is destructive. Affliction can but take away the life; sin takes away the soul (Luke, chapter 12, verse 20). A man that is afflicted may have his conscience quiet. When the ark was tossed on the waves, Noah could sing in the ark. When the body is afflicted and tossed, a Christian can ‘make melody in his heart to the Lord’ (Ephesians, chapter 5, verse 19). But when a man commits sin, conscience is terrified. Witness Spira, who upon his abjuring the faith said that he thought the damned spirits did not feel those torments which he inwardly endured. In affliction one may have the love of God (Revelation, chapter 3, verse 19).

=== 04-15 (1375 characters) ===
If a man should throw a bag of money at another, and in throwing it should hurt him a little and raise the skin, he will not take it unkindly, but will look upon it as a fruit of love. So when God bruises us with affliction, it is to enrich us with the golden graces and comforts of his Spirit. All is in love. But when we commit sin, God withdraws his love. When David sinned he felt nothing but displeasure from God: ‘Clouds and darkness are round about him’ (Psalm 97, verse 2). David found it so. He could see no rainbow, no sunbeam, nothing but clouds and darkness about God’s face. That sin is worse than affliction is evident because the greatest judgment God lays upon a man in this life is to let him sin without control. When the Lord’s displeasure is most severely kindled against a person, he does not say, I will bring the sword and the plague on this man, but, I will let him sin on: ‘So I gave them up unto their own hearts’ lust’ (Psalm 81, verse 12). Now, if the giving up of a man to his sins (in the account of God himself) is the most dreadful evil, then sin is far worse than affliction. And if it be so, then how should it be hated by us! Compare sin with hell, and you shall see that sin is worse. Torment has its emphasis in hell, yet nothing there is as bad as sin. Hell is of God’s making, but sin is none of his making. Sin is the devil’s creature.

=== 04-16 (1490 characters) ===
The torments of hell are a burden only to the sinner, but sin is a burden to God: ‘I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves’ (Amos, chapter 2, verse 13). In the torments of hell there is something that is good, namely, the execution of divine justice. There is justice to be found in hell, but sin is a piece of the highest injustice. It would rob God of his glory, Christ of his purchase, the soul of its happiness. Judge then if sin be not a most hateful thing, which is worse than affliction or hell. (4) Look upon sin in the issue and consequence, and it will appear hateful. Sin reaches the body. It has exposed it to a variety of miseries. We come into the world with a cry and go out with a groan. It made the Thracians weep on their children’s birthday, as Herodotus tells us, to consider the calamities they were to undergo in the world. Sin is the Trojan horse out of which comes a whole army of troubles. I need not name them because almost everyone feels them. “While we suck the honey we are pricked with the briar. Sin gives a dash in the wine of our comforts; it digs our grave (Romans, chapter 5, verse 12). Sin reaches the soul. By sin we have lost the image of God, wherein did consist both our sanctity and our majesty. Adam in his pristine glory was like a herald who has his coat of arms upon him. All reverence him because he carries the king’s coat of arms, but pull this coat off, and no man regards him. Sin has done this disgrace to us.

=== 04-17 (1456 characters) ===
It has plucked off our coat of innocency. But that is not all. This bearded arrow of sin would strike yet deeper. It would for ever separate us from the beautiful vision of God, in whose presence is fulness of joy. If sin be so hyperbolically sinful, it should swell our spleen and stir up our implacable indignation against it. As Ammon’s hatred of Tamar was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her (Second Samuel, chapter 13, verse 15), so we should hate sin infinitely more than ever we loved it. Ingredient 6: Turning from Sin. The sixth ingredient in repentance is a turning from sin. Reformation is left last to bring up the rear of repentance. What though one could, with Niobe, weep himself into a stone, if he did not weep out sin? True repentance, like aqua fortis (nitric acid), eats asunder the iron chain of sin. Therefore weeping and turning are put together (Joel, chapter 2, verse 12). After the cloud of sorrow has dropped in tears, the firmament of the soul is clearer: ‘Repent, and turn yourselves from your idols; and turn away your faces from all your abominations’ (Ezekiel, chapter 14, verse 6). This turning from sin is called a forsaking of sin (Isaiah, chapter 55, verse 7), as a man forsakes the company of a thief or sorcerer. It is called ‘a putting of sin far away’ (Job, chapter 11, verse 14), as Paul put away the viper and shook it into the fire (Acts, chapter 18, verse 5). Dying to sin is the life of repentance.

=== 04-18 (1323 characters) ===
The very day a Christian turns from sin he must enjoin himself a perpetual fast. The eye must fast from impure glances. The ear must fast from hearing slanders. The tongue must fast from oaths. The hands must fast from bribes. The feet must fast from the path of the harlot. And the soul must fast from the love of wickedness. This turning from sin implies a notable change. There is a change wrought in the heart. The flinty heart has become fleshly. Satan would have Christ prove his deity by turning stones into bread. Christ has wrought a far greater miracle in making stones become flesh. In repentance Christ turns a heart of stone into flesh. There is a change wrought in the life. Turning from sin is so visible that others may discern it. Therefore it is called a change from darkness to light (Ephesians, chapter 5, verse 8). Paul, after he had seen the heavenly vision, was so turned that all men wondered at the change (Acts, chapter 9, verse 21). Repentance turned the jailer into a nurse and physician (Acts, chapter 16, verse 33). He took the apostles and washed their wounds and set meat before them. A ship is going eastward; there comes a wind which turns it westward. Likewise, a man was turning hell-ward before the contrary wind of the Spirit blew, turned his course, and caused him to sail heavenward.

=== 04-19 (1355 characters) ===
Chrysostom, speaking of the Ninevites’ repentance, said that if a stranger who had seen Nineveh’s excess had gone into the city after they repented, he would scarce have believed it was the same city because it was so metamorphosed and reformed. Such a visible change does repentance make in a person, as if another soul did lodge in the same body. That the turning from sin be rightly qualified, these few things are requisite: 1. It must be a turning from sin with the heart. The heart is the primum vivens, the first thing that lives, and it must be the primum vertens, the first thing that turns. The heart is that which the devil strives hardest for. Never did he so strive for the body of Moses as he does for the heart of man. In religion the heart is all. If the heart be not turned from sin, it is no better than a lie: ‘her treacherous sister Judah hath not turned unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly’ (Jeremiah, chapter 3, verse 10), or as in the Hebrew, ‘in a lie.’ Judah did make a show of reformation; she was not so grossly idolatrous as the ten tribes. Yet Judah was worse than Israel: she is called ‘treacherous’ Judah. She pretended to a reformation, but it was not in truth. Her heart was not for God: she turned not with the whole heart. It is odious to make a show of turning from sin while the heart is yet in league with it.

=== 04-20 (1388 characters) ===
I have read of one of our Saxon kings who was baptized, who in the same church had one altar for the Christian religion and another for the heathen. God will have the whole heart turned from sin. True repentance must have no reserves or inmates. 2. It must be a turning from all sin. ‘Let the wicked forsake his way’ (Isaiah, chapter 55, verse 7). A real penitent turns out of the road of sin. Every sin is abandoned: as Jehu would have all the priests of Baal slain (Second Kings, chapter 10, verse 24) – not one must escape – so a true convert seeks the destruction of every lust. He knows how dangerous it is to entertain any one sin. He that hides one rebel in his house is a traitor to the Crown, and he that indulges one sin is a traitorous hypocrite. 3. It must be a turning from sin upon a spiritual ground. A man may restrain the acts of sin, yet not turn from sin in a right manner. Acts of sin may be restrained out of fear or design, but a true penitent turns from sin out of a religious principle, namely, love to God. Even if sin did not bear such bitter fruit, if death did not grow on this tree, a gracious soul would forsake it out of love to God. This is the most kindly turning from sin. When things are frozen and congealed, the best way to separate them is by fire. When men and their sins are congealed together, the best way to separate them is by the fire of love.