=== 04-01 (1452 characters) ===
Chapter Four. The Nature of True Repentance Part Two. Ingredient 4: Shame for Sin. The fourth ingredient in repentance is shame: ‘that they may be ashamed of their iniquities’ (Ezekiel, chapter 43, verse 10). Blushing is the colour of virtue. When the heart has been made black with sin, grace makes the face red with blushing: ‘I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face’ (Ezra, chapter 9, verse 6). The repenting Prodigal was so ashamed of his excess that he thought himself not worthy to be called a son any more (Luke, chapter 13, verse 11). Repentance causes a holy bashfulness. If Christ’s blood were not at the sinner’s heart, there would not so much blood come in the face. There are nine considerations about sin which may cause shame: (1) Every sin makes us guilty, and guilt usually breeds shame. Adam never blushed in the time of innocency. While he kept the whiteness of the lily, he had not the blushing of the rose; but when he had deflowered his soul by sin, then he was ashamed. Sin has tainted our blood. We are guilty of high treason against the Crown of heaven. This may cause a holy modesty and blushing. (2) In every sin there is much unthankfulness, and that is a matter of shame. He who is upbraided with ingratitude will blush. We have sinned against God when he has given us no cause: ‘What iniquity have your fathers found in me?’ (Jeremiah, chapter 2, verse 3). Wherein has God wearied us, unless his mercies have wearied us?

=== 04-02 (1466 characters) ===
Oh the silver drops that have fallen on us! We have had the finest of the wheat; we have been fed with angels’ food. The golden oil of divine blessing has run down on us from the head of our heavenly Aaron. And to abuse the kindness of so good a God, how may this make us ashamed! Julius Caesar took it unkindly at the hands of Brutus, on whom he had bestowed so many favours, when he came to stab him: ‘What, thou, my son Brutus?’ O ungrateful, to be the worse for mercy! Aelian reports of the vulture, that it draws sickness from perfumes. To contract the disease of pride and luxury from the perfume of God’s mercy, how unworthy is it; to requite evil for good, to kick against our feeder (Deuteronomy, chapter 32, verse 15); to make an arrow of God’s mercies and shoot at him, to wound him with his own blessing! O horrid ingratitude! Will not this dye our faces a deep scarlet? Unthankfulness is a sin so great that God himself stands amazed at it: ‘Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me’ (Isaiah, chapter 1, verse 2). (3) Sin has made us naked, and that may breed shame. Sin has stripped us of our white linen of holiness. It has made us naked and deformed in God’s eye, which may cause blushing. When Hanun had abused David’s servants and cut off their garments so that their nakedness did appear, the text says, ‘the men were greatly ashamed’ (Second Samuel, chapter 10, verse 5).

=== 04-03 (1379 characters) ===
(4) Our sins have put Christ to shame, and should not we be ashamed? The Jews arrayed him in purple; they put a reed in his hand, spat in his face, and in his greatest agonies reviled him. Here was ‘the shame of the cross’; and that which aggravated the shame was to consider the eminency of his person, as he was the Lamb of God. Did our sins put Christ to shame, and shall they not put us to shame? Did he wear the purple, and shall not our cheeks wear crimson? Who can behold the sun as it were blushing at Christ’s passion, and hiding itself in an eclipse, and his face not blush? (5) Many sins which we commit are by the special instigation of the devil, and should not this cause shame? The devil put it into the heart of Judas to betray Christ (John, chapter 13, verse 2). He filled Ananias’ heart to lie (Acts, chapter 3, verse 3). He often stirs up our passions (James, chapter 3, verse 6). Now, as it is a shame to bring forth a child illegitimately, so too is it to bring forth such sins as may call the devil father. It is said that the Virgin Mary conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost (Luke, chapter 1, verse 33), but we often conceive by the power of Satan. When the heart conceives pride, lust, and malice, it is very often by the power of the devil. May not this make us ashamed to think that many of our sins are committed in copulation with the old serpent?

=== 04-04 (1489 characters) ===
(6) Sin, like Circe’s enchanting cup, turns men into beasts (Psalm 49, verse 12), and is not that matter for shame? Sinners are compared to foxes (Luke, chapter 13, verse 32), to wolves (Matthew, chapter 7, verse 15), to asses (Job, chapter 11, verse 12), to swine (Second Peter, chapter 2, verse 22). A sinner is a swine with a man’s head. He who was once little less than the angels in dignity is now become like the beasts. Grace in this life does not wholly obliterate this brutish temper. Agur, that good man, cried out, ‘Surely I am more brutish than any!’ (Proverbs, chapter 30, verse 2). But common sinners are in a manner wholly brutified; they do not act rationally but are carried away by the violence of their lusts and passions. How may this make us ashamed who are thus degenerated below our own species? Our sins have taken away that noble, masculine spirit which once we had. The crown is fallen from our head. God’s image is defaced, reason is eclipsed, conscience stupified. We have more in us of the brute than of the angel. (7) In every sin there is folly (Jeremiah, chapter 4, verse 22). A man will be ashamed of his folly. Is not he a fool who labours more for the bread that perishes than for the bread of life? Is not he a fool who for a lust or a trifle will lose heaven, like Tiberius who for a draught of drink forfeited his kingdom? Is not he a fool who, to safeguard his body, will injure his soul? As if one should let his arm or head be cut to save his vest!

=== 04-05 (1476 characters) ===
Naviget antyciram (‘Let him sail to Anticyra.’ Horace). Is not he a fool who will believe a temptation before a promise? Is not he a fool who minds his recreation more than his salvation? How may this make men ashamed, to think that they inherit not land, but folly (Proverbs, chapter 14, verse 18). (8) That which may make us blush is that the sins we commit are far worse than the sins of the heathen. We act against more light. To us have been committed the oracles of God. The sin committed by a Christian is worse than the same sin committed by an Indian because the Christian sins against clearer conviction, which is like the dye to the wool or the weight put into the scale that makes it weigh heavier. (9) Our sins are worse than the sins of the devils: the lapsed angels never sinned against Christ’s blood. Christ died not for them. The medicine of his merit was never intended to heal them. But we have affronted and disparaged his blood by unbelief. The devils never sinned against God’s patience. As soon as they apostatised, they were damned. God never waited for the angels, but we have spent upon the stock of God’s patience. He has pitied our weakness, borne with our forwardness. His Spirit has been repulsed, yet has still importuned us and will take no denial. Our conduct has been so provoking as to have tired not only the patience of a Moses but of all the angels. We have put God to it, and made him weary of repenting (Jeremiah, chapter 15, verse 6).

=== 04-06 (1463 characters) ===
The devils never sinned against example. They were the first that sinned and were made the first example. We have seen the angels, those morning stars, fall from their glorious orb; we have seen the old world drowned, Sodom burned, yet have ventured upon sin. How desperate is that thief who robs in the very place where his fellow hangs in chains. And surely, if we have out-sinned the devils, it may well put us to the blush. Use 1. Is shame an ingredient of repentance? If so, how far are they from being penitents who have no shame? Many have sinned away shame: ‘the unjust knoweth no shame’ (Zephaniah, chapter 3, verse 5). It is a great shame not to be ashamed. The Lord sets it as a brand upon the Jews: ‘Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush’ (Jeremiah, chapter 6, verse 15). The devil has stolen shame from men. When one of the persecutors in Queen Mary’s time was upbraided with his bloodiness to the martyrs, he replied, ‘I see nothing to be ashamed of.’ Many are no more ashamed of their sin than King Nebuchadnezzar was of his being turned to grass. When men have hearts of stone and foreheads of brass, it is a sign that the devil has taken full possession of them. There is no creature capable of shame but man. The brute beasts are capable of fear and pain, but not of shame. You cannot make a beast blush. Those who cannot blush for sin do too much resemble the beasts.

=== 04-07 (1489 characters) ===
There are some so far from this holy blushing that they are proud of their sins. They are proud of their long hair. These are the devil’s Nazarites. ‘Doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him’ (First Corinthians, chapter 11, verse 14). It confounds the distinction of the sexes. Others are proud of their black spots. And what if God should turn them into blue spots? Others are so far from being ashamed of sin that they glory in their sins: ‘whose glory is in their shame’ (Philippians, chapter 3, verse 19). Some are ashamed of that which is their glory: they are ashamed to be seen with a good book in their hand. Others glory in that which is their shame: they look on sin as a piece of gallantry. The swearer thinks his speech most graceful when it is interlarded with oaths. The drunkard counts it a glory that he is mighty to drink (Isaiah, chapter 5, verse 22). But when men shall be cast into a fiery furnace, heated seven times hotter by the breath of the Almighty, then let them boast of sin as they see cause. Use 2. Let us show our penitence by a modest blushing: ‘O my God, I blush to lift up my face’ (Ezra, chapter 9, verse 6). ‘My God’ – there was faith; ‘I blush’ – there was repentance. Hypocrites will confidently avouch God to be their God, but they know not how to blush. O let us take holy shame to ourselves for sin. Be assured, the more we are ashamed of sin now, the less we shall be ashamed at Christ’s coming.

=== 04-08 (1470 characters) ===
If the sins of the godly be mentioned at the day of judgment, it will not be to shame them, but to magnify the riches of God’s grace in pardoning them. Indeed, the wicked shall be ashamed at the last day. They shall sneak and hang down their heads, but the saints shall then be as without spot (Ephesians, chapter 5, verse 27), so without shame; therefore they are bid to lift up their heads (Luke, chapter 21, verse 28). Ingredient 5: Hatred of Sin. The fifth ingredient in repentance is hatred of sin. The Schoolmen distinguished a two-fold hatred: hatred of abominations, and hatred of enmity. Firstly, there is a hatred or loathing of abominations: ‘Ye shall loathe yourselves for your iniquities’ (Ezekiel, chapter 36, verse 31). A true penitent is a sin-loather. If a man loathe that which makes his stomach sick, much more will he loathe that which makes his conscience sick. It is more to loathe sin than to leave it. One may leave sin for fear, as in a storm the plate and jewels are cast overboard, but the nauseating and loathing of sin argues a detestation of it. Christ is never loved till sin be loathed. Heaven is never longed for till sin be loathed. When the soul sees an issue of blood running, he cries out, Lord, when shall I be freed from this body of death? When shall I put off these filthy garments of sin and have the fair mitre of glory set upon my head? Let all my self-love be turned into self-loathing (Zechariah, chapter 3, verses 4 and 5).

=== 04-09 (1470 characters) ===
We are never more precious in God’s eyes than when we are lepers in our own. Secondly, there is a hatred of enmity. There is no better way to discover life than by motion. The eye moves, the pulse beats. So to discover repentance there is no better sign than by a holy antipathy against sin. Hatred, said Cicero, is anger boiled up to an inveteracy. Sound repentance begins in the love of God and ends in the hatred of sin. How may true hatred of sin be known? 1. When a man’s spirit is set against sin. The tongue does not only inveigh against sin, but the heart abhors it, so that however curiously painted sin appears, we find it odious, as we abhor the picture of one whom we mortally hate, even though it may be well drawn. ‘I love not thee, Sabidi.’ Suppose a dish be finely cooked and the sauce good, yet if a man has an antipathy against the meat, he will not taste it. So let the devil cook and dress sin with pleasure and profit, yet a true penitent with a secret abhorrence of it is disgusted by it and will not meddle with it. 2. True hatred of sin is universal. True hatred of sin is universal in two ways: in respect of the faculties, and of the object. (1) Hatred is universal in respect of the faculties, that is, there is a dislike of sin not only in the judgment, but in the will and affections. Many a one is convinced that sin is a vile thing, and in his judgment has an aversion to it, but yet he tastes sweetness and has a secret complacency in it.

=== 04-10 (1462 characters) ===
Here is a disliking of sin in the judgment and an embracing of it in the affections; whereas in true repentance the hatred of sin is in all the faculties, not only in the intellectual part, but chiefly in the will: ‘what I hate, that do I’ (Romans, chapter 7, verse 15). Paul was not free from sin, yet his will was against it. (2) Hatred is universal in respect of the object. He who hates one sin hates all. Aristotle said, hatred is against the whole kind. He who hates a serpent hates all serpents: ‘I hate every false way’ (Psalm 119, verse 104). Hypocrites will hate some sins which mar their credit, but a true convert hates all sins, gainful sins, complexion-sins, the very stirrings of corruption. Paul hated the motions of sin (Romans, chapter 7, verse 23). 3. True hatred against sin is against sin in all forms. A holy heart detests sin for its intrinsic pollution. Sin leaves a stain upon the soul. A regenerate person abhors sin not only for the curse but for the contagion. He hates this serpent not only for its sting but for its poison. He hates sin not only for hell, but as hell. 4. True hatred is implacable. It will never be reconciled to sin any more. Anger may be reconciled, but hatred cannot. Sin is that Amalek which is never to be taken into favour again. The war between a child of God and sin is like the war between those two princes: ‘there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days’ (First Kings, chapter 14, verse 30).