=== 03-18 (1419 characters) ===
‘Cease to do evil’ (Isaiah, chapter 1, verse 16). It is vain to confess, ‘We have done those things we ought not to have done,’ and continue still in doing so. Pharaoh confessed he had sinned (Exodus, chapter 9, verse 17), but when the thunder ceased he fell to his sin again: ‘he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart’ (Exodus, chapter 9, verse 34). Origen calls confession the vomit of the soul whereby the conscience is eased of that burden which did lie upon it. Now, when we have vomited up sin by confession we must not return to this vomit. What king will pardon that man who, after he has confessed his treason, practises new treason? Thus we see how confession must be qualified. Use 1: Is confession a necessary ingredient in repentance? Here is a bill of indictment against four sorts of persons: (1) It reproves those that hide their sins, as Rachel hid her father’s images under her (Genesis, chapter 31, verse 34). Many had rather have their sins covered than cured. They do with their sins as with their pictures: they draw a curtain over them; or as some do with their bastards, smother them. But though men will have no tongue to confess, God has an eye to see; he will unmask their treason: ‘I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes’ (Psalm 30, verse 11). Those iniquities which men hide in their hearts shall be written one day on their foreheads as with the point of a diamond.

=== 03-19 (1444 characters) ===
They who will not confess their sin as David did, that they may be pardoned, shall confess their sin as Achan did, that they may be stoned. It is dangerous to keep the devil’s counsel: ‘He that covereth his sins shall not prosper’ (Proverbs, chapter 28, verse 13). (2) It reproves those who do indeed confess sin but only by halves. They do not confess all; they confess the pence but not the pounds. They confess vain thoughts or badness of memory but not the sins they are most guilty of, such as rash anger, extortion, uncleanness, like he in Plutarch who complained his stomach was not very good when his lungs were bad and his liver rotten. But if we do not confess all, how should we expect that God will pardon all? It is true that we cannot know the exact catalogue of our sins, but the sins which come within our view and cognizance, and which our hearts accuse us of, must be confessed as ever we hope for mercy. (3) It reproves those who in their confessions mince and extenuate their sins. A gracious soul labours to make the worst of his sins, but hypocrites make the best of them. They do not deny they are sinners, but they do what they can to lessen their sins: they indeed offend sometimes, but it is their nature, and it is long of such occasions. These are excuses rather than confessions. ‘I have sinned: for I have transgressed the commandment of the Lord: because I feared the people’ (First Samuel, chapter 15, verse 24).

=== 03-20 (1462 characters) ===
Saul lays his sin upon the people: they would have him spare the sheep and oxen. It was an apology, not a self-indictment. This runs in the blood. Adam acknowledged that he had tasted the forbidden fruit, but instead of aggravating his sin he translated it from himself to God: ‘The woman thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree and I did eat’ (Genesis, chapter 3, verse 12), that is, if I had not had this woman to be a tempter, I would not have transgressed. Inscripsere deos sceleri (They charge the gods with the crime. Ovid). That is a bad sin indeed that has no excuse, as it must be a very coarse wool which will take no dye. How apt we are to pare and curtail sin, and look upon it through the small end of the perspective, that it appears but as ‘a little cloud, like a man’s hand’ (First Kings, chapter 18, verse 44). (4) It reproves those who are so far from confessing sin that they boldly plead for it. Instead of having tears to lament it, they use arguments to defend it. If their sin be passion they will justify it: ‘I do well to be angry’ (Jonah, chapter 4, verse 9). If it be covetousness they will vindicate it. When men commit sin they are the devil’s servants; when they plead for it they are the devil’s attorneys, and he will give them a fee. Use 2: Let us show ourselves penitents by sincere confession of sin. The thief on the cross made a confession of his sin: ‘we indeed are condemned justly’ (Luke, chapter 23, verse 41).

=== 03-21 (1453 characters) ===
And Christ said to him, ‘Today shalt thou be with me in paradise’ (Luke, chapter 23, verse 43), which might have occasioned that speech of Augustine’s, that confession of sin shuts the mouth of hell and opens the gate of paradise. That we may make a free and ingenuous confession of sin, let us consider: (1) Holy confession gives glory to God: ‘My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him’ (Joshua, chapter 7, verse 19). A humble confession exalts God. What a glory is it to him that out of our own mouths he does not condemn us? While we confess sin, God’s patience is magnified in sparing, and his free grace in saving such sinners. (2) Confession is a means to humble the soul. He who subscribes himself a hell-deserving sinner will have little heart to be proud. Like the violet, he will hang down his head in humility. A true penitent confesses that he mingles sin with all he does, and therefore has nothing to boast of. Uzziah, though a king, yet had a leprosy in his forehead; he had enough to abase him (Second Chronicles, chapter 26, verse 19). So a child of God, even when he does good, yet acknowledges much evil to be in that good. This lays all his feathers of pride in the dust. (3) Confession gives vent to a troubled heart. When guilt lies boiling in the conscience, confession gives ease. It is like the lancing of an abscess which gives ease to the patient. (4) Confession purges out sin.

=== 03-22 (1481 characters) ===
Augustine called it ‘the expeller of vice.’ Sin is a bad blood; confession is like the opening of a vein to let it out. Confession is like the dung-gate, through which all the filth of the city was carried forth (Nehemiah, chapter 3, verse 13). Confession is like pumping at the leak; it lets out that sin which would otherwise drown. Confession is the sponge that wipes the spots from off the soul. (5) Confession of sin endears Christ to the soul. If I say I am a sinner, how precious will Christ’s blood be to me! After Paul has confessed a body of sin, he breaks forth into a gratulatory triumph for Christ: ‘I thank God through Jesus Christ’ (Romans, chapter 7, verse 25). If a debtor confesses a judgment but the creditor will not exact the debt, instead appointing his own son to pay it, will not the debtor be very thankful? So when we confess the debt, and that even though we should for ever lie in hell we cannot pay it, but that God should appoint his own Son to lay down his blood for the payment of our debt, how is free grace magnified and Jesus Christ eternally loved and admired! (6) Confession of sin makes way for pardon. No sooner did the prodigal come with a confession in his mouth, ‘I have sinned against heaven,’ than his father’s heart did melt towards him, and he kissed him (Luke, chapter 15, verse 20). When David said, ‘I have sinned,’ the prophet brought him a box with a pardon, ‘The Lord hath put away thy sin’ (Second Samuel, chapter 12, verse 13).

=== 03-23 (1294 characters) ===
He who sincerely confesses sin has God’s bond for a pardon: ‘If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins’ (First John, chapter 1, verse 9). Why does not the apostle say that if we confess he is merciful to forgive our sins? No; he is just, because he has bound himself by promise to forgive such. God’s truth and justice are engaged for the pardoning of that man who confesses sin and comes with a penitent heart by faith in Christ. (7) How reasonable and easy is this command that we should confess sin! (a) It is a reasonable command, for if one has wronged another, what is more rational than to confess he has wronged him? We, having wronged God by sin, how equal and consonant to reason is it that we should confess the offence, (b) It is an easy command. What a vast difference is there between the first covenant and the second! In the first covenant it was, if you commit sin you die; in the second covenant it is, if you confess sin you shall have mercy. In the first covenant no surety was allowed; under the covenant of grace, if we do but confess the debt, Christ will be our surety. What way could be thought of as more ready and facile for the salvation of man than a humble confession? ‘Only acknowledge thine iniquity’ (Jeremiah, chapter 3, verse 13).

=== 03-24 (1483 characters) ===
God says to us, I do not ask for sacrifices of rams to expiate your guilt; I do not bid you part with the fruit of your body for the sin of your soul, ‘only acknowledge thine iniquity’; do but draw up an indictment against yourself and plead guilty, and you shall be sure of mercy. All this should render this duty amiable. Throw out the poison of sin by confession, and ‘this day is salvation come to thy house.’ There remains one case of conscience: are we bound to confess our sins to men? The papists insist much upon auricular confession; one must confess his sins in the ear of the priest or he cannot be absolved. They urge, ‘Confess your sins one to another’ (James, chapter 5, verse 16), but this scripture is little to their purpose. It may as well mean that the priest should confess to the people as well as the people to the priest. Auricular confession is one of the Pope’s golden doctrines. Like the fish in the Gospel, it has money in its mouth: ‘when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money’ (Matthew, chapter 17, verse 27). But though I am not for confession to men in a popish sense, yet I think in three cases there ought to be confession to men: Firstly, where a person has fallen into scandalous sin and by it has been an occasion of offence to some and of falling to others, he ought to make a solemn and open acknowledgement of his sin, that his repentance may be as visible as his scandal (Second Corinthians, chapter 2, verses 6 and 7).

=== 03-25 (1376 characters) ===
Secondly, where a man has confessed his sin to God, yet still his conscience is burdened, and he can have no ease in his mind, it is very requisite that he should confess his sins to some prudent, pious friend, who may advise him and speak a word in due season (James, chapter 5, verse 16). It is a sinful modesty in Christians that they are not more free with their ministers and other spiritual friends in unburdening themselves and opening the sores and troubles of their souls to them. If there is a thorn sticking in the conscience, it is good to make use of those who may help to pluck it out. Thirdly, where any man has slandered another and by clipping his good name has made it weigh lighter, he is bound to make confession. The scorpion carries its poison in its tail, the slanderer in his tongue. His words pierce deep like the quills of the porcupine. That person who has murdered another in his good name or, by bearing false witness, has damaged him in his estate, ought to confess his sin and ask forgiveness: ‘if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift’ (Matthew, chapter 5, verses 23 and 24). How can this reconciliation be effected but by confessing the injury? Till this is done, God will accept none of your services.

=== 03-26 (172 characters) ===
Do not think the holiness of the altar will privilege you; your praying and hearing are in vain till you have appeased your brother’s anger by confessing your fault to him.