=== 03-08 (1489 characters) ===
Turgescunt lumina fletu. (Eyes are swollen with weeping.) They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn as for an only son’ (Zechariah, chapter 12, verse 10). Sorrow for sin must surpass worldly sorrow. We must grieve more for offending God than for the loss of dear relations. ‘In that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth’ (Isaiah, chapter 22, verse 12): this was for sin. But in the case of the burial of the dead we find God prohibiting tears and baldness (Jeremiah, chapter 22, verse 10; chapter 16, verse 6), to intimate that sorrow for sin must exceed sorrow at the grave; and with good reason, for in the burial of the dead it is only a friend who departs, but in sin God departs. Sorrow for sin should be so great as to swallow up all other sorrow, as when the pain of the stone and gout meet, the pain of the stone swallows up the pain of the gout. We are to find as much bitterness in weeping for sin as ever we found sweetness in committing it. Surely David found more bitterness in repentance than ever he found comfort in Bathsheba. Our sorrow for sin must be such as makes us willing to let go of those sins which brought in the greatest income of profit or delight. The physic shows itself strong enough when it has purged out our disease. The Christian has arrived at a sufficient measure of sorrow when the love of sin is purged out. 5. Godly sorrow in some cases is joined with restitution.

=== 03-09 (1468 characters) ===
Whoever has wronged others in their estate by unjust fraudulent dealing ought in conscience to make them recompense. There is an express law for this: ‘he shall recompense his trespass with the principal thereof, and add unto it the fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against whom he hath trespassed’ (Numbers, chapter 5, verse 7). Thus Zacchaeus made restitution: ‘if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold’ (Luke, chapter 19, verse 8). When Selymus the great Turk, lay upon his death-bed, being urged by Pyrrhus to put to charitable use that wealth he had wronged the Persian merchants of, he commanded rather that it should be sent back to the right owners. Shall not a Christian’s creed be better than a Turk’s Koran? It is a bad sign when a man on his death-bed bequeaths his soul to God and his ill-gotten goods to his friends. I can hardly think God will receive his soul. Augustine said, ‘Without restitution, no remission.’ And it was a speech of old Latimer, If ye restore not goods unjustly gotten, ye shall cough in hell. Question 1: Suppose a person has wronged another in his estate and the wronged man is dead, what should he do? Answer. Let him restore his ill-gotten goods to that man’s heirs and successors. If none of them be living, let him restore to God, that is, let him put his unjust gain into God’s treasury by relieving the poor. Question 2: What if the party who did the wrong is dead? Answer.

=== 03-10 (1467 characters) ===
Then they who are his heirs ought to make restitution. Mark what I say: if there be any who have estates left them, and they know that the parties who left their estates had defrauded others and died with that guilt upon them, then the heirs or executors who possess those estates are bound in conscience to make restitution, otherwise they entail the curse of God upon their family. Question 3: If a man has wronged another and is not able to restore, what should he do? Answer. Let him deeply humble himself before God, promising to the wronged party full satisfaction if the Lord make him able, and God will accept the will for the deed. 6. Godly sorrow is abiding. It is not a few tears shed in a passion that will serve the turn. Some will fall a-weeping at a sermon, but it is like an April shower, soon over, or like a vein opened and presently stopped again. True sorrow must be habitual. O Christian, the disease of your soul is chronic and frequently returns upon you; therefore you must be continually physicking yourself by repentance. This is that sorrow which is ‘after a godly manner.’ Use: How far are they from repentance who never had any of this godly sorrow! Such are: (1) The Papists, who leave out the very soul of repentance, making all penitential work consist in fasting, penance, pilgrimages, in which there is nothing of spiritual sorrow. They torture their bodies, but their hearts are not rent. What is this but the carcase of repentance?

=== 03-11 (1457 characters) ===
(2) Carnal Protestants, who are strangers to godly sorrow. They cannot endure a serious thought, nor do they love to trouble their heads about sin. Paracelsus spoke of a frenzy some have which will make them die dancing. Likewise sinners spend their days in mirth; they fling away sorrow and go dancing to damnation. Some have lived many years, yet never put a drop in God’s bottle, nor do they know what a broken heart means. They weep and wring their hands as if they were undone when their estates are gone, but have no agony of soul for sin. There is a two-fold sorrow: firstly, a rational sorrow, which is an act of the soul whereby it has a displacency against sin and chooses any torture rather than to admit sin; secondly, there is a sensitive sorrow, which is expressed by many tears. The first of these is to be found in every child of God, but the second, which is a sorrow running out at the eye, all have not. Yet it is very commendable to see a weeping penitent. Christ counts as great beauties those who are tender-eyed; and well may sin make us weep. We usually weep for the loss of some great good; by sin we have lost the favour of God. If Micah did so weep for the loss of a false god, saying, ‘Ye have taken away my gods, and what have I more?’ (Judges, chapter 18, verse 24) then well may we weep for our sins which have taken away the true God from us. Some may ask the question, whether our repentance and sorrow must always be alike.

=== 03-12 (1433 characters) ===
Although repentance must be always kept alive in the soul, yet there are two special times when we must renew our repentance in an extraordinary manner: (1) Before the receiving of the Lord’s Supper. This spiritual passover is to be eaten with bitter herbs. Now our eyes should be fresh broached with tears, and the stream of sorrow overflow. A repenting frame is a sacramental frame. A broken heart and a broken Christ do well agree. The more bitterness we taste in sin, the more sweetness we shall taste in Christ. When Jacob wept he found God: ‘And he called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen God face to face’ (Genesis, chapter 32, verse 30). The way to find Christ comfortably in the sacrament is to go weeping thither. Christ will say to a humble penitent, as to Thomas: ‘Reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side’ (John, chapter 20, verse 27), and let those bleeding wounds of mine heal thee. (2) Another time of extraordinary repentance is at the hour of death. This should be a weeping season. Now is our last work to be done for heaven, and our best wine of tears should be kept against such a time. We should repent now, that we have sinned so much and wept so little, that God’s bag has been so full and his bottle so empty (Job, chapter 14, verse 17). We should repent now that we repented no sooner, that the garrisons of our hearts held out so long against God ere they were levelled by repentance.

=== 03-13 (1397 characters) ===
We should repent now that we have loved Christ no more, that we have fetched no more virtue from him and brought no more glory to him. It should be our grief on our death-bed that our lives have had so many blanks and blots in them, that our duties have been so fly-blown with sin, that our obedience has been so imperfect, and we have gone so lame in the ways of God. When the soul is going out of the body, it should swim to heaven in a sea of tears. Ingredient 3: Confession of Sin. Sorrow is such a vehement passion that it will have vent. It vents itself at the eyes by weeping and at the tongue by confession: The children of Israel stood and confessed their sins (Nehemiah, chapter 9, verse 2). ‘I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offence’ (Hosea, chapter 5, verse 15); it is a metaphor alluding to a mother who, when she is angry, goes away from the child and hides her face till the child acknowledges its fault and begs pardon. Gregory Nazianzen calls confession ‘a salve for a wounded soul.’ Confession is self-accusing: ‘Lo, I have sinned’ (Second Samuel, chapter 24, verse 17). Indeed, among men it is otherwise: no man is bound to accuse himself but desires to see his accuser. When we come before God, however, we must accuse ourselves: me me adsum qui feci in me convertite ferrum. And the truth is that by this self-accusing we prevent Satan’s accusing.

=== 03-14 (1457 characters) ===
In our confessions we tax ourselves with pride, infidelity, passion, so that when Satan, who is called ‘the accuser of the brethren,’ shall lay these things to our charge, God will say, They have accused themselves already; therefore, Satan, thou art non-suited; thy accusations come too late. The humble sinner does more than accuse himself; he, as it were, sits in judgment and passes sentence upon himself. He confesses that he has deserved to be bound over to the wrath of God. And hear what the apostle Paul says: ‘if we would judge ourselves we should not be judged’(First Corinthians, chapter 11, verse 31). But have not wicked men, like Judas and Saul, confessed sin? Yes, but theirs was not a true confession. That confession of sin may be right and genuine, these eight qualifications are requisite: 1. Confession must be voluntary. It must come as water out of a spring, freely. The confession of the wicked is extorted, like the confession of a man upon a rack. When a spark of God’s wrath flies into their conscience, or they are in fear of death, then they will fall to their confessions. Balaam, when he saw the angel’s naked sword, could say, ‘I have sinned’ (Numbers, chapter 22, verse 34). But true confession drops from the lips as myrrh from the tree or honey from the comb, freely. ‘I have sinned against heaven, and before thee’ (Luke, chapter 13, verse 18): the prodigal charged himself with sin before his father charged him with it.

=== 03-15 (1380 characters) ===
2. Confession must be with compunction. The heart must deeply resent it. A natural man’s confessions run through him as water through a pipe. They do not at all affect him. But true confession leaves heart-wounding impressions on a man. David’s soul was burdened in the confession of his sins: ‘as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me’ (Psalm 38, verse 4). It is one thing to confess sin and another thing to feel sin. 3. Confession must be sincere. Our hearts must go along with our confessions. The hypocrite confesses sin but loves it, like a thief who confesses to stolen goods, yet loves stealing. How many confess pride and covetousness with their lips but roll them as honey under their tongue. Augustine said that before his conversion he confessed sin and begged power against it, but his heart whispered within him, ‘not yet, Lord.’ He was afraid to leave his sin too soon. A good Christian is more honest. His heart keeps pace with his tongue. He is convinced of the sins he confesses, and abhors the sins he is convinced of. 4. In true confession a man particularizes sin. A wicked man acknowledges he is a sinner in general. He confesses sin by wholesale. His confession of sin is much like Nebuchadnezzar’s dream: ‘I have dreamed a dream’ (Daniel, chapter 2, verse 3), but he could not tell what it was: ‘The thing is gone from me’ (Daniel, chapter 2, verse 5).

=== 03-16 (1482 characters) ===
In the same way a wicked man says, ‘Lord, I have sinned,’ but does not know what the sin is; at least he does not remember, whereas a true convert acknowledges his particular sins. As it is with a wounded man, who comes to the surgeon and shows him all his wounds – here I was cut in the head, there I was shot in the arm – so a mournful sinner confesses the several distempers of his soul. Israel drew up a particular charge against themselves: ‘we have served Baalim’ (Judges, chapter 10, verse 10). The prophet recites the very sin which brought a curse with it: ‘Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophets, which spake in thy name’ (Daniel, chapter 9, verse 6). By a diligent inspection into our hearts we may find some particular sin indulged; point to that sin with a tear. 5. A true penitent confesses sin in the fountain. He acknowledges the pollution of his nature. The sin of our nature is not only a privation of good but an infusion of evil. It is like canker to iron or stain to scarlet. David acknowledges his birth-sin: ‘I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me’ (Psalm 51, verse 5). We are ready to charge many of our first sins to Satan’s temptations, but this sin of our nature is wholly from ourselves; we cannot shift it off to Satan. We have a root within that bears gall and wormwood (Deuteronomy, chapter 29, verse 18). Our nature is an abyss and seminary of all evil, from whence come those scandals that infest the world.

=== 03-17 (1480 characters) ===
It is this depravity of nature which poisons our holy things; it is this which brings on God’s judgments and makes our mercies stick in the birth. Oh confess sin in the fountain! 6. Sin is to be confessed with all its circumstances and aggravations. Those sins which are committed under the gospel horizon are doubtless dyed in grain. Confess sins against knowledge, against grace, against vows, against experiences, against judgments. ‘The wrath of God came upon them and slew the fattest of them. For all this they sinned still’ (Psalm 78, verses 31 and 32). These are killing aggravations which do accent and enhance our sins. 7. In confession we must so charge ourselves as to clear God. Should the Lord be severe in his providences and unsheath his bloody sword, yet we must acquit him and acknowledge he has done us no wrong. Nehemiah in his confessing of sin vindicates God’s righteousness: ‘Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us’ (Nehemiah, chapter 9, verse 33). Mauritius the emperor, when he saw his wife slain before his eyes by Phocas, cried out, ‘Righteous art thou, O Lord, in all thy ways.’ 8. We must confess our sins with a resolution not to act them over again. Some run from the confessing of sin to the committing of sin, like the Persians who have one day in the year when they kill serpents and after that day suffer them to swarm again. Likewise, many seem to kill their sins in their confessions and afterwards let them grow as fast as ever.