=== 02-01 (1414 characters) ===
Chapter Two. Counterfeit Repentance. To discover what true repentance is, I shall first show what it is not. There are several deceits of repentance which might occasion that saying of Augustine that ‘repentance damns many.’ He meant a false repentance; a person may delude himself with counterfeit repentance. 1. The first deceit of repentance is legal terror. A man has gone on long in sin. At last God arrests him, shows him what desperate hazard he has run, and he is filled with anguish. Within a while the tempest of conscience is blown over, and he is quiet. Then he concludes that he is a true penitent because he has felt some bitterness in sin. Do not be deceived: this is not repentance. Ahab and Judas had some trouble of mind. It is one thing to be a terrified sinner and another to be a repenting sinner. Sense of guilt is enough to breed terror. Infusion of grace breeds repentance. If pain and trouble were sufficient to repentance, then the damned in hell should be most penitent, for they are most in anguish. Repentance depends upon a change of heart. There may be terror, yet with no change of heart. 2. Another deceit about repentance is resolution against sin. A person may purpose and make vows, yet be no penitent. ‘Thou saidst, I will not transgress’ (Jeremiah, chapter 2, verse 20). Here was a resolution; but see what follows: ‘under every green tree thou wanderest, playing the harlot.’

=== 02-02 (1484 characters) ===
Notwithstanding her solemn engagements, she played fast and loose with God and ran after her idols. We see by experience what protestations a person will make when he is on his sick-bed, if God should recover him again; yet he is as bad as ever. He shows his old heart in a new temptation. Resolutions against sin may arise: (1) From present extremity; not because sin is sinful, but because it is painful. This resolution will vanish. (2) From fear of future evil, an apprehension of death and hell: ‘I looked, and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed with him’ (Revelation, chapter 6, verse 8). What will not a sinner do, what vows will he not make, when he knows he must die and stand before the judgment-seat? Self-love raises a sick-bed vow, and love of sin will prevail against it. Trust not to a passionate resolution; it is raised in a storm and will die in a calm. 3. The third deceit about repentance is the leaving of many sinful ways. It is a great matter, I confess, to leave sin. So dear is sin to a man that he will rather part with a child than with a lust: ‘Shall I give the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?’ (Micah, chapter 6, verse 7). Sin may be parted with, yet without repentance. (1) A man may part with some sins and keep others, as Herod reformed many things that were amiss but could not leave his incest. (2) An old sin may be left in order to entertain a new, as you put off an old servant to take another.

=== 02-03 (765 characters) ===
This is to exchange a sin. Sin may be exchanged and the heart remained unchanged. He who was a prodigal in his youth turns usurer in his old age. A slave is sold to a Jew; the Jew sells him to a Turk. Here the master is changed, but he is a slave still. So a man moves from one vice to another but remains a sinner still. (3) A sin may be left not so much from strength of grace as from reasons of prudence. A man sees that though such a sin be for his pleasure, yet it is not for his interest. It will eclipse his credit, prejudice his health, impair his estate. Therefore, for prudential reasons, he dismisses it. True leaving of sin is when the acts of sin cease from the infusion of a principle of grace, as the air ceases to be dark from the infusion of light.

=== 03-01 (1460 characters) ===
Chapter Three. The Nature of True Repentance Part One. I shall next show what gospel repentance is. Repentance is a grace of God’s Spirit whereby a sinner is inwardly humbled and visibly reformed. For a further amplification, know that repentance is a spiritual medicine made up of six special ingredients: 1. Sight of sin. 2. Sorrow for sin. 3. Confession of sin. 4. Shame for sin. 5. Hatred for sin. 6. Turning from sin. If any one is left out it loses its virtue. Ingredient 1: Sight of Sin. The first part of Christ’s physic is eye-salve (Acts, chapter 26, verse 18). It is the great thing noted in the prodigal’s repentance: ‘he came to himself’ (Luke, chapter 15, verse 17). He saw himself a sinner and nothing but a sinner. Before a man can come to Christ he must first come to himself. Solomon, in his description of repentance, considers this as the first ingredient: ‘if they shall bethink themselves’ (First Kings, chapter 8, verse 47). A man must first recognize and consider what his sin is, and know the plague of his heart before he can be duly humbled for it. The first creature God made was light. So the first thing in a penitent is illumination: ‘Now ye are light in the Lord’ (Ephesians, chapter 5, verse 8). The eye is made both for seeing and weeping. Sin must first be seen before it can be wept for. Hence I infer that where there is no sight of sin, there can be no repentance. Many who can spy faults in others see none in themselves.

=== 03-02 (1443 characters) ===
They cry that they have good hearts. Is it not strange that two should live together, and eat and drink together, yet not know each other? Such is the case of a sinner. His body and soul live together, work together, yet he is unacquainted with himself. He knows not his own heart, nor what a hell he carries about him. Under a veil a deformed face is hid. Persons are veiled over with ignorance and self-love; therefore they see not what deformed souls they have. The devil does with them as the falconer with the hawk. He blinds them and carries them hooded to hell: ‘the sword shall be upon his right eye’ (Zechariah, chapter 11, verse 17). Men have insight enough into worldly matters, but the eye of their mind is smitten. They do not see any evil in sin; the sword is upon their right eye. Ingredient 2: Sorrow for Sin. ‘I will be sorry for my sin’ (Psalm 38, verse 18). Ambrose calls sorrow the embittering of the soul. The Hebrew word ‘to be sorrowful’ signifies ‘to have the soul, as it were, crucified.’ This must be in true repentance: ‘They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn’ (Zechariah, chapter 12, verse 10), as if they did feel the nails of the cross sticking in their sides. A woman may as well expect to have a child without pangs as one can have repentance without sorrow. He that can believe without doubting, suspect his faith; and he that can repent without sorrowing, suspect his repentance.

=== 03-03 (1451 characters) ===
Martyrs shed blood for Christ, and penitents shed tears for sin: ‘she stood at Jesus’ feet weeping’ (Luke, chapter 7, verse 38). See how this limbeck dropped. The sorrow of her heart ran out at her eye. The brazen laver for the priests to wash in (Exodus, chapter 30, verse 18) typified a double laver: the laver of Christ’s blood we must wash in by faith, and the laver of tears we must wash in by repentance. A true penitent labours to work his heart into a sorrowing frame. He blesses God when he can weep; he is glad of a rainy day, for he knows that it is a repentance he will have no cause to repent of. Though the bread of sorrow be bitter to the taste, yet it strengthens the heart (Psalm 104, verse 13; Second Corinthians, chapter 7, verse 10). This sorrow for sin is not superficial: it is a holy agony. It is called in scripture a breaking of the heart: ‘The sacrifices of God are a broken and a contrite heart’ (Psalm 51, verse 17); and a rending of the heart: ‘Rend your heart’ (Joel, chapter 2, verse 13). The expressions of smiting on the thigh (Jeremiah, chapter 31, verse 19), beating on the breast (Luke, chapter 18, verse 13), putting on of sackcloth (Isaiah, chapter 22, verse 12), plucking off the hair (Ezra, chapter 9, verse 3), all these are but outward signs of inward sorrow. This sorrow is: (1) To make Christ precious. O how desirable is a Saviour to a troubled soul! Now Christ is Christ indeed, and mercy is mercy indeed.

=== 03-04 (1476 characters) ===
Until the heart is full of compunction it is not fit for Christ. How welcome is a surgeon to a man who is bleeding from his wounds! (2) To drive out sin. Sin breeds sorrow, and sorrow kills sin. Holy sorrow is the rhubarb to purge out the ill humours of the soul. It is said that the tears of vine-branches are good to cure the leprosy. Certainly the tears that drop from the penitent are good to cure the leprosy of sin. The salt water of tears kills the worm of conscience. (3) To make way for solid comfort: ‘They that sow in tears shall reap in joy’ (Psalm 126, verse 3). The penitent has a wet seed-time but a delicious harvest. Repentance breaks the abscess of sin, and then the soul is at ease. Hannah, after weeping, went away and was no more sad (First Samuel, chapter 1, verse 18). God’s troubling of the soul for sin is like the angel’s troubling of the pool (John, chapter 5, verse 4), which made way for healing. But not all sorrow evidences true repentance. There is as much difference between true and false sorrow as between water in the spring, which is sweet, and water in the sea, which is briny. The apostle speaks of sorrowing ‘after a godly manner’ (Second Corinthians, chapter 7, verse 9). But what is this godly sorrowing? There are six qualifications of it: 1. True godly sorrow is inward. It is inward in two ways: It is a sorrow of the heart. The sorrow of hypocrites lies in their faces: ‘they disfigure their faces’ (Matthew, chapter 6, verse 16).

=== 03-05 (1447 characters) ===
They make a sour face, but their sorrow goes no further, like the dew that wets the leaf but does not soak to the root. Ahab’s repentance was in outward show. His garments were rent but not his spirit (First Kings, chapter 21, verse 27). Godly sorrow goes deep, like a vein which bleeds inwardly. The heart bleeds for sin: ‘they were pricked in their heart’ (Acts, chapter 2, verse 37). As the heart bears a chief part in sinning, so it must in sorrowing. (2) It is a sorrow for heart-sins, the first outbreaks and risings of sin. Paul grieved for the law in his members (Romans, chapter 7, verse 23). The true mourner weeps for the stirrings of pride and concupiscence. He grieves for the ‘root of bitterness’ even though it never blossoms into act. A wicked man may be troubled for scandalous sins; a real convert laments heart-sins. 2. Godly sorrow is ingenuous. It is sorrow for the offence rather than for the punishment. God’s law has been infringed, his love abused. This melts the soul in tears. A man may be sorry, yet not repent, as a thief is sorry when he is taken, not because he stole, but because he has to pay the penalty. Hypocrites grieve only for the bitter consequence of sin. I have read of a fountain that only sends forth streams on the evening before a famine. Likewise their eyes never pour out tears except when God’s judgments are approaching. Pharaoh was more troubled for the frogs and river of blood than for his sin.

=== 03-06 (1443 characters) ===
Godly sorrow, however, is chiefly for the trespass against God, so that even if there were no conscience to smite, no devil to accuse, no hell to punish, yet the soul would still be grieved because of the prejudice done to God. ‘My sin is ever before me’ (Psalm 51, verse 3); David does not say, The sword threatened is ever before me, but ‘my sin.’ O that I should offend so good a God, that I should grieve my Comforter! This breaks my heart! Godly sorrow shows itself to be ingenuous because when a Christian knows that he is out of the gun-shot of hell and shall never be damned, yet still he grieves for sinning against that free grace which has pardoned him. 3. Godly sorrow is fiducial. It is intermixed with faith: ‘the father of the child cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe’ (Mark, chapter 9, verse 24). Here was sorrow for sin chequered with faith, as we have seen a bright rainbow appear in a watery cloud. Spiritual sorrow will sink the heart if the pulley of faith does not raise it. As our sin is ever before us, so God’s promise must be ever before us. As we much feel our sting, so we must look up to Christ our brazen serpent. Some have faces so swollen with worldly grief that they can hardly look out of their eyes. That weeping is not good which blinds the eye of faith. If there are not some dawnings of faith in the soul, it is not the sorrow of humiliation but of despair. 4. Godly sorrow is a great sorrow.

=== 03-07 (1487 characters) ===
‘In that day shall there be a great mourning, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon’ (Zechariah, chapter 12, verse 11). Two suns did set that day when Josiah died, and there was a great funeral mourning. To such a height must sorrow for sin be boiled up. Pectore ab into suspiria. (Sighings from the bottom of one’s heart.) Question 1: Do all have the same degree of sorrow? Answer. No, sorrow does recipere magis et minus (produce greater or lesser sorrows). In the new birth all have pangs, but some have sharper pangs than others. (1) Some are naturally of a more rugged disposition, of higher spirits, and are not easily brought to stoop. These must have greater humiliation, as a knotty piece of timber must have greater wedges driven into it. (2) Some have been more heinous offenders, and their sorrow must be suitable to their sin. Some patients have their sores let out with a needle, others with a lance. Flagitious sinners must be more bruised with the hammer of the law. (3) Some are designed and cut out for higher service, to be eminently instrumental for God, and these must have a mightier work of humiliation pass upon them. Those whom God intends to be pillars in his church must be more hewn. Paul, the prince of the apostles, who was to be God’s ensign-bearer to carry his name before the Gentiles and kings, was to have his heart more deeply lanced by repentance. Question 2: But how great must sorrow for sin be in all? Answer. It must be as great as for any worldly loss.