=== 00-01 (1443 characters) ===
The Doctrine of Repentance. By Thomas Watson. From the Banner of Truth edition. Epistle to the Reader. Christian reader, The two great graces essential to a saint in this life are faith and repentance. These are the two wings by which he flies to heaven. Faith and repentance preserve the spiritual life as heat and radical moisture do the natural. The grace which I am going to discuss is repentance. Chrysostom thought it the fittest subject for him to preach upon before the Emperor Arcadius. Austin caused the penitential psalms to be written before him as he lay upon his bed, and he often perused them with tears. Repentance is never out of season; it is of as frequent use as the artificer’s tool or the soldier’s weapon. If I am not mistaken, practical points are more needful in this age than controversial and polemical. I had thought to have smothered these meditations in my desk but, conceiving them to be of great concern at this juncture of time, I have rescinded my first resolution and have exposed them to a critical view. Repentance is purgative; fear not the working of this pill. Smite your soul, said Chrysostom, smite it; it will escape death by that stroke. How happy it would be if we were more deeply affected with sin, and our eyes did swim in their orb. We may clearly see the Spirit of God moving in the waters of repentance, which though troubled, are yet pure. Moist tears dry up sin and quench the wrath of God.

=== 00-02 (1327 characters) ===
Repentance is the cherisher of piety, the procurer of mercy. The more regret and trouble of spirit we have first at our conversion, the less we shall feel afterwards. Christians, do you have a sad resentment of other things and not of sin? Worldly tears fall to the earth, but godly tears are kept in a bottle (Psalm 56, verse 8). Judge not holy weeping superfluous. Tertullian thought he was born for no other end but to repent. Either sin must drown or the soul burn. Let it not be said that repentance is difficult. Things that are excellent deserve labour. Will not a man dig for gold in the ore though it makes him sweat? It is better to go with difficulty to heaven than with ease to hell. What would the damned give that they might have a herald sent to them from God to proclaim mercy upon their repentance? What volleys of sighs and groans would they send up to heaven? What floods of tears would their eyes pour forth? But it is now too late. They may keep their tears to lament their folly sooner than to procure pity. O that we would therefore, while we are on this side of the grave, make our peace with God! Tomorrow may be our dying day; let this be our repenting day. How we should imitate the saints of old who embittered their souls and sacrificed their lusts, and put on sackcloth in the hope of white robes.

=== 00-03 (1349 characters) ===
Peter baptized himself with tears; and that devout lady Paula (of whom Jerome writes), like a bird of paradise, bemoaned herself and humbled herself to the dust for sin. Besides our own personal miscarriages, the deplorable condition of the land calls for a contribution of tears. Have we not lost much of our pristine fame and renown? The time was when we sat as princess among the provinces (Lamentations, chapter 1, verse 1), and God made the sheaves of other nations do obeisance to our sheaf (Genesis, chapter 37, verse 7), but has not our glory fled away as a bird (Hosea, chapter 9, verse 11)? And what severe dispensations are yet behind we cannot tell. Our black and hideous vapours having ascended, we may fear loud thunder-claps should follow. And will not all this bring us to our senses and excite in us a spirit of humiliation? Shall we sleep on the top of the mast when the winds are blowing from all the quarters of heaven? O let not the apple of our eye cease (Lamentations, chapter 2, verse 18). I will not launch forth any further in a prefatory discourse, but that God would add a blessing to this work and so direct this arrow, that though shot at rovers, it may hit the mark, and that some sin may be shot to death, shall be the ardent prayer of him who is The well-wisher of your soul’s happiness, Thomas Watson. 25 May, 1668.

=== 01-01 (1401 characters) ===
Chapter One. A Preliminary Discourse. Saint Paul, having been falsely accused of sedition by Tertullus – ‘we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition’ (Acts, chapter 24, verse 5) – makes an apology for himself before Festus and King Agrippa in chapter 26 of the Book of Acts. Paul proves himself an orator. He courts the king (1) by his gesture: he stretched forth his hands, as was the custom of orators; (2) by his manner of speech: ‘I think myself happy, king Agrippa, because I shall answer for myself before thee touching all the things whereof I am accused’ (Acts, chapter 26, verse 2). Paul then treats of three things and in so deep a strain of rhetoric as almost to have converted King Agrippa: (1) He speaks of the manner of his life before his conversion: ‘after the most straitest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee’ (verse 5). During the time of his unregeneracy he was zealous for traditions, and his false fire of zeal was so hot that it scorched all who stood in his way’; many of the saints did I shut up in prison’ (verse 10). (2) He speaks of the manner of his conversion: ‘I saw in the way a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun’ (verse 13). This light was no other than what shone from Christ’s glorified body. ‘And I heard a voice speaking unto me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?’ The body being hurt, the head in heaven cried out.

=== 01-02 (1478 characters) ===
At this light and voice Paul was amazed and fell to the earth: ‘And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest’ (verses 14 through 15). Paul was now taken off from himself. All opinion of self-righteousness vanished and he grafted his hope of heaven upon the stock of Christ’s righteousness. (3) He speaks of the manner of his life after his conversion. He who had been a persecutor before now became a preacher: ‘Arise, for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness of those things which thou hast seen’ (verse 16). When Paul, this ‘vessel of election,’ was savingly wrought upon, he laboured to do as much good as previously he had done hurt. He had persecuted saints to death before, now he preached sinners to life. God first sent him to the Jews at Damascus and afterwards enlarged his commission to preach to the Gentiles. And the subject he preached on was this, ‘That they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance’ (verse 20). A weighty and excellent subject! I shall not dispute the priority, whether faith or repentance goes first. Doubtless repentance shows itself first in a Christian’s life. Yet I am apt to think that the seeds of faith are first wrought in the heart. As when a burning taper is brought into a room the light shows itself first, but the taper was before the light, so we see the fruits of repentance first, but the beginnings of faith were there before.

=== 01-03 (1396 characters) ===
That which inclines me to think that faith is seminally in the heart before repentance is because repentance, being a grace, must be exercised by one that is living. Now, how does the soul live but by faith? ‘The just shall live by his faith’ (Hebrews, chapter 10, verse 38). Therefore there must be first some seeds of faith in the heart of a penitent, otherwise it is a dead repentance and so of no value. Whether faith or repentance goes first, however, I am sure that repentance is of such importance that there is no being saved without it. After Paul’s shipwreck he swam to shore on planks and broken pieces of the ship (Acts, chapter 27, verse 44). In Adam we all suffered shipwreck, and repentance is the only plank left us after shipwreck to swim to heaven. It is a great duty incumbent upon Christians solemnly to repent and turn unto God: ‘Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand’ (Matthew, chapter 3, verse 2); ‘Repent therefore, and be converted that your sins may be blotted out’ (Acts, chapter 3, verse 19); ‘Repent of this thy wickedness’ (Acts, chapter 8, verse 22). In the mouths of three witnesses this truth is confirmed. Repentance is a foundation grace: ‘Not laying again the foundation of repentance’ (Hebrews, chapter 6, verse 1). That religion which is not built upon this foundation must needs fall to the ground. Repentance is a grace required under the gospel.

=== 01-04 (1490 characters) ===
Some think it legal; but the first sermon that Christ preached, indeed, the first word of his sermon, was ‘Repent’ (Matthew, chapter 4, verse 17). And his farewell that he left when he was going to ascend was that ‘repentance should be preached in his name’ (Luke, chapter 24, verse 47). The apostles did all beat upon this string: ‘They went out and preached that men should repent’ (Mark, chapter 6, verse 12). Repentance is a pure gospel grace. The covenant of works admitted no repentance; there it was, sin and die. Repentance came in by the gospel. Christ has purchased in his blood that repenting sinners shall be saved. The law required personal, perfect, and perpetual obedience. It cursed all who could not come up to this: ‘Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them’ (Galatians, chapter 3, verse 10). It does not say, he that obeys not all things, let him repent, but, let him be cursed. Thus repentance is a doctrine that has been brought to light only by the gospel. How is repentance wrought? The manner in which repentance is wrought is: 1. Partly by the word. ‘When they heard this, they were pricked in their heart’(Acts, chapter 2, verse 37). The word preached is the engine God uses to effect repentance. It is compared to a hammer and to a fire (Jeremiah, chapter 23, verse 29), the one to break, the other to melt the heart. How great a blessing it is to have the word, which is of such virtue, dispensed!

=== 01-05 (1418 characters) ===
And how hard they who put out the lights of heaven will find it to escape hell! 2. By the Spirit. Ministers are but the pipes and organs. It is the Holy Ghost breathing in them that makes their words effectual: ‘While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word’ (Acts, chapter 10, verse 44). The Spirit in the word illuminates and converts. When the Spirit touches a heart it dissolves with tears: ‘I will pour upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace … and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn’ (Zechariah, chapter 12, verse 10). It is wonderful to consider what different effects the word has upon men. Some at a sermon are like Jonah: their heart is tender and they let fall tears. Others are no more affected with it than a deaf man with music. Some grow better by the word, others worse. The same earth which causes sweetness in the grape causes bitterness in the wormwood. What is the reason the word works so differently? It is because the Spirit of God carries the word to the conscience of one and not another. One has received the divine unction and not the other (First John, chapter 2, verse 20). O pray that the dew may fall with the manna, that the Spirit may go along with the word. The chariot of ordinances will not carry us to heaven unless the Spirit of God join himself to this chariot (Acts, chapter 8, verse 29).